now that we have to find a nash
equilibrium let's see how well does it
do as a solution concept
last week we have used three criteria to
evaluate solution concepts namely we
have looked at existence does it exist
in any game
it's predictive power does it reasonably
narrow down set of all strategy profiles
and lastly robustness is it robust to
small
mistakes or estimation errors of the
player's payoffs
and here i want to start with existence
the good news is that a nash equilibrium
always exists in mixed strategies at
least if the players have finitely many
strategies available and this result is
due to nash in 1950.
now i do want to spend some time going
through this proof because one is the
most fundamental solution concept
and two
because existence of all the future
concepts that we will look at in the
class can essentially be reduced to
existence of nash equilibrium
the main motivation behind the proof is
to go back at the very fundamental
definition of a nash equilibrium namely
that it's a mutual best response by the
player
we have already defined
the best response correspondences of
each players and now we define
the mutual best response operator
and is given by
the direct product here of all the best
response correspondences by the
different players
so what this means is the result here
will again be
well a strategy profile so this will be
a set of strategy profiles where the
first component is a best respond best
response
to the strategy profile by player one's
opponents the second component will be a
best response to player two's opponents
and so on
and
a nash equilibrium
is
well a mutual best response which means
that
sigma in natural room sigma
is
an element of b sigma because sigma 1 is
the best response
to player 1 bonus and so on so this
means it's a fixed point of this
operator b
and the main idea will be to apply a
suitable fixed point theorem
now we will start by visualizing the
proof for a two person two action game
because we can easily draw the best
response functions nicely and then we
will try to see how could we generalize
this
to the end player
and finitely many action game
now let's start with brower's fixed
point theorem
this theorem is not directly related to
nash equilibrium but it is the easiest
fixed point theorem and kind of gives us
the idea
of
how some other fixed point theorems work
so what the theorem says is that if we
have a function from 0 1 to 0 1
and if that function is continuous then
it must have a fixed point
and
the basic idea behind it is that if we
draw any function
here from from 0 1 2 0 1 then we must
cross the diagonal once and at the
diagonal um
we must have a fixed point
now let's discuss the assumption so the
the continuity assumption i think is
quite clear if we have a discontinuous
function then we could jump across the
diagonal and then we wouldn't have a
fixed point
there's a second assumption here which
is about the domain and the domain here
from zero one has three special
properties
namely
it is closed it is bounded and is
convexed
to see why it has to be closed
that we look at the open interval from 0
1 then this function here would not have
to have an intersection because it could
always lie below the diagonal if zero
was excluded
then why the domain has to be bounded
well if it was unbounded then we could
have
a function that always lies above the
diagonal let's say a parabola one plus x
square would always lie above the
diagonal
and then convex means that the domain
does not have any gaps
and the reason why it's necessary is
visualized here in this in this figure
um
if domain had a gap
then
the function would not have a fixed
point or could not have a fixed point by
definition so even one minus x would not
have a fixed point if we
elim or remove
the center part where the fixed point
would occur if we remove that from the
domain
but if all of those are satisfied and
the function is continuous then it must
have a fixed point
now
a best response correspondence
is not a function it is a correspondence
which means it can have several values
not just one
so we need to
extend this idea to correspondences
so let's visualize this with two player
games where both players have two
actions
where we know that we can parametrize
the player's strategies with simply
one variable let's say the probability
that they choose the first of their
actions
and we've seen that a correspondence
is the name mapping
from 0 1 two zero one
where as input it takes the probability
or the strategy of
player one's opponent so in this case y
and it gives us back which values of x
are best responses
and only three cases can happen
either player one prefers their first
action their second action or player one
is indifferent
and if it is indifferent is precisely
the case when the correspondence is not
single valued
and we have here a few of those cases so
here is where the best response
correspondence is not single valued
and the consequence if we now look at
this graph is that
they must
always intersect the mutual best or the
best response correspondences because
they are sort of
continuous in a sense that we can draw
the graph without ever removing the
paper from the pen
and we just have to sort of formalize
what a continuous correspondence is in
this setting
so
we have to prevent two kinds two kinds
of gaps we have to prevent horizontal
gaps and vertical gaps
horizontal gaps can happen if the best
response correspondence is empty
and
if we
ask them to be non-empty then
horizontal gaps won't happen
to prevent vertical gaps we need two
conditions we need that the best
response correspondence is convex so
this means that if
any two
strategies are best response that
anything any convex combination of them
is also a best response
and the second condition that we need is
that the graph
of the best response correspondence is
closed so the graph here is simply
exactly what it says is how we draw
we draw the graph it's the pair of all
the inputs and all the outputs
and the reason why we need both is that
this is a case here where the best
response corresponds is convex
but
there is a
or a vertical gap because
the graph is not closed
conversely
this now is one where the graph is
closed so the endpoints are included but
there is a vertical gap because
the best response correspondence is not
convex so for
x equal to one half there's two best
responses but anything in between is not
the best response
and once we have both conditions then
there are no more vertical gaps
and so those will be the conditions
under which a correspondence is sort of
continuous
and this brings us to kagutani's fixed
point theorem which is the theorem we
want to apply
for or to establish existence of nash
equilibrium
and it's essentially a correspondence
version of
brower's fixed point theorem
and it says that a correspondence does
have a fixed point if
the first condition if the domain is
non-empty convex and compact subset of
euclidean space so euclidean space here
is
rn
then
the correspondence is non-empty and
convex for all values so those two
together
will give us this continuity of the best
response correspondence
actually those two sorry two and three
the correspondence has a closed graph
and the first one is about the domain
which is similar that we had in
brower's fixed point theorem right that
that the domain is non-empty convex and
compact so there are no gaps in the
domain
and the proof of nash existence theorem
will now be verifying these three
conditions
in our setting and then we can use
cacutana's fixed point theorem to
establish a fixed point of the best
response or the mutual best response
operator
so let's first verify that the domain
satisfies also all those conditions that
we need
so what is the domain well the domain is
simply the set of all mixed strategy
profiles
and
because
we look at finite games here it means
that the set of all mixed strategies by
player i
is
this simplex here right this triangle
shaped form in rd
so in particular it's on empty convex
and compact
and the product of
all these non-empty convex and compact
sets is then also convex and compact
in particular because we take the finite
product here it is also non-empty
all right this
tells us that the domain satisfies all
the conditions that we need
then
let's now check that the graph of the
best response
are the mutual best response operator is
closed
to do that we need to
approximate
a
limit point and then show that the limit
itself is a best response
so to set up the proof
we find
some strategy profile sigma we
approximate it with a sequence of
strategy profiles such that along the
sequence
player i always best responds to
[Music]
the strategic profiles of his opponents
and then we to show that it has a close
graph we must show that
um
in the limit
sigma i has to be a best response to the
limit profile of player i's opponents
and if we show this for every player i
then it will also be true for the mutual
best response operator
so
we show this by a contradiction we
suppose that it's not true right that
all of those are satisfied
but that in the limit we don't get the
best response
now if we don't get the best response
this means that there must be some
better response so in particular some
pure strategy that gives us a strictly
higher payoff and let's denote the
increase of payoff that the pure
strategy gives by epsilon
now because
the approximating sequence of strategy
profiles converges
there must exist some index k naught
such that for any index larger than that
for any k larger than that
the distance in utilities
or the difference in utilities is less
than epsilon half and right this
happens because the utilities are
continuous in the strategy profile
because
how we take it's essentially an
expectation
but now this means that
for any k above those
we can't have a
so sigma ik cannot be a best response
because if in the limit
it's
worse by epsilon
and along the approximating sequence we
lose less than epsilon half then
somewhere
along the approximating sequence it must
already happen that
strategy by player i
is dominated by s i by at least epsilon
half
so this contradicts the assumption that
along the sequence player i
plays a best response
so this means that the graph
has to be closed because that's the only
the only other option
then lastly the last thing that remains
is to show that
the best response correspondences are
convex and non-empty so for convexity
let us rewrite the set of best responses
as
all
those
strategies by player i
that
attain
the optimal
or the maximum of expected utilities
overall
um
of
player i strategies
this means for any two best responses
they have to attain exactly the same
utility and will denote that by v i
now to show convexity we take the convex
combination of any two strategy profiles
which defines a valid strategy profile
because
all of those so each strategy profile
the probabilities attached to all the
pure strategies they sum up to one
and then if we weight them
with these weights lambda and one minus
lambda then the sum of them will still
add up to one
so if we look at the expected utility
the expression that we will get is this
and
because this is a sum of a sum we can
write this as two sums so lambda times
the the sum over all pure strategies of
these two terms and then plus one minus
lambda times the sum over all pure
strategies of these two terms
and what we obtain is then okay lambda
times the utility and sigma i
plus one minus lambda utility and sigma
hat i and because both of those attain
the same utility
we get vi and so it has to be a best
response
this shows that it is convex
and again because there's finitely many
players and we've shown this for an
arbitrary player it also means that the
mutual best response operator is convex
lastly we have to show that
the best response response is non-empty
again we show it by player by player
now because there are finitely many
strategies
the
maximum of player is utility over all
pure strategies is certainly attained as
the maximum over finitely many options
and the maximum over the pure strategies
has to be a best response because by the
indifference principle
if a mixed strategy is the best response
then also all the pure strategies in
support are a best response
so this means that at least one pure
strategy has to be in the support namely
the pure strategy
or has to be a best response namely the
pure strategy that maximizes player i's
utility
so this shows that the best response
correspondence is not empty and we can
apply
the calculations fixed point theorem
which tells us there is a fixed point
and the fixed point of the mutual best
response operator is precisely a nash
equilibrium
and this concludes the proof of
existence
now in addition to
existence we wondered about predictive
power
are nash equilibria unique well we've
already seen that they are not unique
crossing the intersection had three
possible nash equilibrium but i wouldn't
necessarily say that this is
a disadvantage
it means that even infinitely rational
individuals have freedom of joints and
several possible outcomes
are consistent with rational behavior
and
and correct conjectures about the other
players strategies
the only thing that is important is that
predictions are
meaningful so this means that the
solution set is sufficiently restrictive
and we have seen that
in the example with the intersection it
was much much smaller than let's say the
rationalizable strategies for which we
obtained all the possible strategy
profiles
in particular the two solutions that we
got are very meaningful it's those that
we see in reality where
one of
the two crosses intersection and the
other one waits
now we will further refine
nash equilibrium
for
the remainder of the class essentially
starting next week where we
think that in some situations certain
nash equilibria are unreasonable
and then we will try to narrow down the
set of nash equilibria by imposing
additional restrictions and this is sort
of the plan for the next six weeks
the robustness the last criteria
and
we will find that nash equivalent are
not robust so
here
is the example of a game where there are
two pure strategy nash equilibria but
one in weekly dominated strategies
and
weak dominance is not robust so if
we look at
a very small perturbation of payoffs
here if we subtract epsilon from this
outcome here
then this is no longer a best response
for player 2 and so
tr is not a nash equilibrium in any
approximation of the game so this means
that this is not a robust nash
equilibrium
now that we've discussed these
properties how does nash equilibrium
relate to the solution concepts that
we've seen
well
it's definitely um
definitely contains strict dominant
strategy equilibria because
yeah if every player has a strictly
dominant strategy then this is the
unique best response to anything the
other players could play so this is the
only possible match equilibrium so any
strict dominance equilibrium is a nash
equilibrium
and also a nash equilibrium is
definitely rationalizable
because
in the nash equilibrium conjectures are
correct so this means that
um
that yeah it is the best response to a
rationalizable conjecture because it is
rationalized again
by
um
the nash equilibrium itself
yeah so
and this i guess this
relation here of the solution concepts
highlights again
why nash equilibria are so popular we've
seen that strict dominance is way too
restrictive doesn't always exist
rationalizability is very permissive and
then nash equilibrium sort of hits the
sweet spot in between where it always
exists but is still quite restrictive so
that we can narrow down the sort of all
strategy profiles to a reasonable set
that is much smaller
good
the proof of the existence theorem is
again in all the game theory textbooks
and of course again in nash's original
paper so you can have a look at those if
you would like